# SORCERY! Spell Book

## RULES FOR USING MAGIC

During your training you have been taught a number of spells and incantations
which you can call upon to aid you on your quest. The full list of spells
follows these instructions.

Spells are identified by a three-letter word. Throughout the books you will be
given the option of using spells to overcome problems and opponents. *The spells
will be identified only by these three-letter words, so it is important that you
memorize at least some of the codes*.

Thus before you can start using your powers of sorcery, you will need to spend
some time memorizing spells, as would a real wizard learning the magic arts.
Obviously, you will not be able to memorize all forty-eight spells at once, but
the more you use the book, the more familiar you will become with the most
useful spells.

Try starting by memorizing between six and ten spells (the best ones to start
with are given below) and relying on your swordsmanship to fight some of the
creatures you encounter. It is possible, with a little luck, to complete your
quest with these spells, but your task will become easier when you are capable
of using more spells.

Some spells also require the use of an artefact, such as a piece of jewellery or
a magic ring. If you try to use a spell without possessing the correct artefact,
you will be wasting your **STAMINA**, as the spell will not work

Each time you use a spell- whether it is successful or not - it will draw on
your reserves of energy and concentration. A cost, in **STAMINA** points, is
given for each spell. Each time you use a spell, you must deduct this cost from
your **STAMINA** score.

You may study the Book of Spells for as long as you want before embarking on an
adventure, *but once you have set off, you may never again refer to it and must
rely purely on your memory until your adventure is over*. Nor may you write the
spells down for easy reference. In a real situation where you may be surprised
by a creature, you would not have time to start flicking through your Spell Book
trying to work out the best spell to cast!

| _Code_  | _Effect_                                                 | _Stamina Cost_ |
| ------- | -------------------------------------------------------- | -------------- |
| **ZAP** | Creates a lightning bolt which shoots from the fingertip | 4              |
| **FOF** | Creates a protective force-field                         | 4              |
| **LAW** | Enables creatures to be controlled                       | 4              |
| **DUM** | Makes creatures extremely clumsy                         | 4              |
| **HOT** | Creates fireball which can be aimed at enemies           | 4              |
| **WAL** | Creates a magic wall to defend against physical objects  | 4              |

**ZAP** and **HOT** are strong attacking spells. **FOF** and WAL are good
general-purpose defensive spells, whilst **LAW** and **DUM** will be useful if
you get into a tricky situation. 

Note that these spells will often be more powerful than you need in a given 
situation - they are not cheap in terms of **STAMINA** points - but they are
good all-rounders. As you get to know more spells from the Spell Book, you 
will be able to choose more economical spells which will be equally as effective
against certain perils.

Read through the list again, then cover up the 'Effect column with your hand.
How many can you remember? When you can remember them by heart, you can begin
your quest.

## HINTS ON USING SPELLS

As you familiarize yourself with the spells in this Spell Book, your skill and
abilities in the SORCERY! adventures will improve. 

Learning the six basic spells will allow you to start playing, with minimal 
delay. These spells will get you out of most difficulties, but they are 
expensive (in terms of sTAMINA points) and you will often find it necessary
to rely on your limited powers of swordsmanship particularly with weaker 
creatures, in order to avoid running dangerously short of **STAMINA**.

Other spells are more economical but will be given less often as options, thus
relying more on your memory and skill as a wizard. The most economical spells of
all are those which require magical artefacts, which must be found on your
adventure.

Remember that there are heavy penalties for guessing spells! If you choose a
spell code which does not represent a spell, or if you choose a spell for which
you do not have the required artefact, you will lose extra STAMINA points. In
some cases, death will be your penalty! 

Finally, remember that not all spells will be used in the first adventure. Some
will not come in until the second, third or fourth adventures. A few are never
used at all! As you get into these later books, your six basic spells will be
given less often as options. The spells are arranged to some extent in their 
order of usefulness in the Spell Book listing - but this is not a hard and fast
rule. An adept wizard should be able to complete the first adventure without
too much difficulty but the going gets progressively rougher in further 
instalments.

You will soon begin to make your own discoveries about the spells themselves. 
There is a certain logic to the way they are arranged, the options that are 
given and their codes. But these discoveries you must make for yourself. 
Experience will make you more skilful with magic. All this is part of the 
art of sorcery.

## THE SPELLS

### ZAP

An extremely powerful weapon, this spell creates a blast of lightning which
shoots from the caster's hand, which must be pointed in the desired direction.
It is effective against virtually all living creatures which have no magical
defences. But it takes great strength and concentration to use.

Cost 4 **STAMINA** points

### HOT

The caster may direct this spell with his hands in any direction desired As it
is cast, a burning fireball shoots from the hands towards its target. It will be
effective against any creature, whether magical or not, unless that creature
cannot be harmed by fire. The fireball so created causes severe burns on impact,
but extinguishes soon after hitting its target.

Cost 4 **STAMINA** points

### FOF

This powerful Spell creates a magical and physical barrier in front of the
caster which is capable of keeping out all physical intruders and most magical
ones. Its creation takes excessive mental concentration but the resulting
force-field is both extremely strong and is under the control of its creator's
will, who can allow one-way penetration, or can position it as desired .

Cost 4 **STAMINA** points

### WAL

The casting of this spell creates an invisible wall in front of the caster. This
wall is impervious to all missiles, creatures, etc. It is a very useful
defensive spell.

Cost 4 **STAMINA** points

### LAW

Casting this spell at an attacking creature allows the caster to take control of
the attacker's will. The attack will cease and the creature will immediately
come under the control of the caster. However, this spell works only on
non-intelligent creatures and lasts only for a short time.

Cost 4 **STAMINA** points

### DUM

When cast at a creature holding an object of some sort (e.g. a weapon), this
spell will make the creature clumsy and uncoordinated. It will drop the
object, fumble to pick it up, drop it again - in short the creature is unlikely
to do the caster any harm with any objects while under the influence of this
spell.

Cost 4 **STAMINA** points

### BIG

When this spell is cast on the caster's own body, it will inflate the body to
three times normal size. This increases the power of the caster and is
especially useful against large opponents, but must be used with caution in
confined spaces.

Cost 2 **STAMINA** points

### WOK

A coin of some sort is necessary for this spell. The caster places the coin on
the wrist and casts the spell onto it. The coin becomes magically fixed on the
wrist and acts as an invisible metal shield with an effective protection circle
of just under three feet across. This will shield the user against all normal
weapons. Afterwards the coin is no longer usable as a coin.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### DOP

This spell may be used to open any locked door. Casting the spell works:
directly on the lock tumblers and the door may be opened freely. If the door is
bolted from the inside, the bolts will be undone. The spell will not work on
doors sealed by magic.

Cost 2 **STAMINA** points

### RAZ

To perform this spell, beeswax is required. By rubbing the wax on any edged
weapon (sword, axe, dagger, etc.) and casting this spell, the blade will become
razor-sharp and do double its normal damage. Thus if it normally inflicts 2
**STAMINA** points worth of damage, it will now inflict 4.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### SUS

This spell may be cast when the caster suspects a trap of some kind. Once cast
it will indicate telepathically to the caster whether or not to beware of a trap
and, ifso, the best protective action. If caught in a trap, this spell may also
be used to minimize its effects in certain cases.

Cost 2 **STAMINA** points

### SIX

This spell is cast onto the caster's own body. Its effect is to create multiple
images of the caster, all identical and all capable of casting spells and/or
attacking, although each will perform identical actions as if reflected in a
mirror. Most creatures faced with these replicas will be unable to tell which is
the real one and will fight all six.

Cost 2 **STAMINA** points

### JIG

When this spell is cast, the recipient gets the uncontrollable urge to dance.
The caster can make any creature dance merry jigs by playing a small Bamboo
Flute. If this flute has been found the affected creature will dance for as long
as it is played. This will normally give the caster time to escape - or he may
continue playing and watch the show!

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### GOB

This creation spell requires any number of teeth of Goblins. The spell may be
cast onto these teeth to create one, two, or an army of Goblins. These Goblins
can then be commanded to fight an enemy or will perform any duties they are
instructed to carry out. They will disappear as soon as their duties have been
performed.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point per Goblin created

### YOB

Casting this spell requires the tooth of a Giant. When this spell is cast upon
the tooth correctly, a Giant, some twelve feet tall, will be created instantly.
The caster has control over the Giant and may command him to fight an opponent,
perform some feat of strength, etc. The Giant will disappear when his duty is
done.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### GUM

Casting this spell, together with using the contents of a vial of glue, will
cause the glue to become super-sticky, bonding in less than a second. Using the
spell, the caster will be able to stick creatures to the floor or walls,
although it is necessary to get the victim into contact with the glue from the
vial. This can be done, for instance, by throwing it at the creature's feet, or
by resting it on top of a slightly opened door, so that it falls when the door
is opened.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### HOW

This spell is to be used in perilous situations when information about the
safest way of escape is desired. When it has been cast, the caster will get an
inclination towards one exit or, if a means of defence is present nearby, will
be directed towards it by a strange psychic force.

Cost 2 **STAMINA** points

### DOC

Medicinal potions carRied and used by the caster will, under this spell, have
their effects increased so that they will heal any wounded human or creature who
drinks them. The potions may be used on the caster - the spell must be cast as
potion is being administered - but they will not bring a being who has actually
died back to life.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### DOZ

This spell may be cast upon any creature, reducing its movements and reactions
to about a sixth of its normal speed. Thus the creature appears to move as in a
dream se- quence, making it much easier to evade or defeat.

Cost 2 **STAMINA** points

### DUD

By casting this spell, the caster can create an illusion of treasure in its many
forms. Gold pieces, silver coins, gems and jewels can be created at will and
these can be used to distract, pay off or bribe creatures. The illusionary
riches will disappear as soon as the caster is out of sight.

Cost 2 **STAMINA** points

### MAG

This spell protects its caster from most magical spells. It must be cast
quickly, before the attacking spell takes effect. It works by neutralizing the
attacking spell which disperses harmlessly. This spell is thus a very powerful
protective weapon, but it does not work against every spell.

Cost 2 **STAMINA** points

### POP

A potent little spell, but one which calls for great mental concentration, this
spell must be cast on small pebbles. Once charged with magic, these pebbles can
be thrown and will explode on impact. Apart from being dangerous to anything
within shatter distance, the pebbles make a loud bang when they explode

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### FAL

This spell is useful if the caster is caught in a pit trap or falls from a
consider- able height. When cast, it makes the caster's body as light as a
feather. The caster will float down through the air and land gently on the
ground

Cost 2 **STAMINA** points

### DIM

A good defensive spell, this can be cast at any creature attacking the caster.
Its effect is to muddle the mind of its victim, temp- orarily confusing the
creature. However, it must be handled with caution, as a creature so deranged
may act irrationally and unpredictably.

Cost 2 **STAMINA** points

### FOG

This spell may only be cast in a closed room with no windows. Once cast, the
room turns pitch black in the eyes of all but the caster - even though torches
and candles may still be burning. It renders blind any creatures within the
room, Its effects are only temporary.

Cost 2 **STAMINA** points

### MUD

As this spell is cast, the caster must sprinkle grains of sand on to the floor
as desired (e.g. in front of a creature). The spell takes effect on the sand and
the floor, creating a pool of quicksand. Any creature stepping on to this quick-
sand will slowly be drowned in it.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### NIF

As this spell is cast, the air surrounding the caster becomes filled with a
nauseating stench. This smell is so horrible that it will cause any creature
which catches a whiff of it to vomit violently. It will thus weaken any
adversary with a sense of smell. This includes the caster unless he is wearing a
pair of nose plugs. The effect will be more pronounced in creatures with large
noses.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### TEL

To activate this spell, the caster must wear a cloth skullcap. With the aid of
this cap, the spell will allow the user to read the mind of any intelligent
creature encountered learning about its strengths, weaknesses, the con- tents of
nearby rooms, etc.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### GAK

In order to use this spell, the caster must be in possession of a Black
Facemask, which must be worn while the spell is being cast. It can be cast
directly on to an opponent and has the effect of creating a terrible fear within
his mind. Brave creatures will be less affected than cowardly ones, thus the
effect varies from a cold sweat and loss of nerve to the creature's being
reduced to a quivering jelly cowering in the corner of a room.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### SAP

The effect of this spell, which is only useful in combat, is to demoralize an
opponent so that his will to win is lost. Any creature so demoralized will be
easier to defeat - though victory is still not certain.

Cost 2 **STAMINA** points

### GOD

This is a form of illusion spell which can only be performed if the caster is
wearing aJewel of Gold. When this spell is cast, any creatures or humans in the
vicinity will take an immediate liking to the caster. This does not mean that
they will not fight, if such is their duty, but they will be more likely to give
information that they would not normally give, They may even help the caster in
spite of their normally being hostile.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### KIN

This creation spell is useful in battles. It requires the use of a Gold-Backed
Mirror, which must be pointed at a creature as the spell is cast. It creates an
exact replica of any creature being fought and this double is under the control
of the caster, who can instruct it to fight the original creature. Both will
fight with the same strengths and weaknesses - only luck will separate their
fates. If the original creature dies, its double will disappear. It will also
disappear if it is defeated.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### PEP

A Potion of Fire Water must be taken by the caster for this spell to be used. It
will enhance the effects of the Fire Water to give the caster double or treble
his or her own normal strength. Although the effects are temporary, they will
normally be enough to aid in battle or to perform some feat of super-strength

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### ROK

Special Stone Dust is required for this spell. The Dust must be thrown at a
creature as the spell is being cast. Within seconds the victim will start to
petrify. As its movements become slower and eventually cease, it will start to
turn grey. Some moments after the spell is cast, it will have solidified into a
grey stone statue

Cost 1 ****STAMINA**** point

### NIP

The caster must cast this spell on his or her own body. Under the influence of
this spell, the caster becomes exceedingly quick and may run, speak, think or
fight at three times normal speed. However, this spell will only take effect if
the caster sniffs Yellow Powder before using the spell.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### HUF

In order to use this spell, the caster must possess the Galehorn, a trumpet-like
instrument which plays a discordant note. The spell is cast on to the horn and
it is blown in a particular direction. As the spell takes effect, a tremendous
wind rushes from the trumpet. This wind is capable of blowing over man-sized
creatures, or it can be used to blow things off shelves, over ledges, etc.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### FIX

Applicable to both animate and inanimate objects, this spell has the effect of
holding an opponent or object where it stands, unable to move even if in
mid-air. In order to cast this spell, however, the caster must be holding a
Staff of Oak Sapling. Anything held fast by this spell will remain frozen until
the caster leaves the vicinity

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### NAP

Effective only against living creatures, this spell causes them to become drowsy
and, within several seconds, to fall fast asleep. It is used in conjunction with
a Brass Pendulum. The spell concentrates the creature's attention on the
Pendulum, which the caster must swing slowly to and fro before the creature, in
order to hypnotize it.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### ZEN

In order to cast this spell, the caster must wear a Jewel-Studded Medallion
around the neck. Casting this spell will then allow the caster to float in the
air at any height desired. A magician hovering thus will remain suspended for as
long as desired and may float around at will.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### YAZ

This spell will not work unless the caster is wearing a fine Pearl Ring Casting
the spell while wearing this ring renders the caster's body invisible to any
reasonably intelligent creature. It may be used to give considerable advantage
in battle or to escape from a dangerous situation. Any creature with ears will
be able to hear the caster as he moves around the room. Less intelligent
creatures will only be partially convinced, as this is a form of illusion spell.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### SUN

This spell may only be cast upon the yellow Sun Jewel. Once cast, the Jewel
begins to glow brightly. Its intensity is under the control of the caster, who
can make it brilliant - in order to blind attacking creatures - or just light
enough to act as a torch to see in dark rooms

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### KID

In order to use this spell, the caster must be wearing a Bracelet of Bone. Once
the spell is cast, the caster must concentrate on a particular illusion (e.g.
the floor is made of hot coals, the caster has turned into a Demon, etc.) and
this ilusion will appear real in the eyes of its intended victim. This may allow
time for escape or lower a creature's defences. The spell will not work on
non-intelligent creatures. If the caster acts in such a way as to destroy the
illusion (e.g. turns into a mouse and then goes on to strike the creature with a
sword), its effect will be lost immediately.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### RAP

To use this spell, the caster must be wearing a Green-Haired Wig. In conjunction
with this wig, the spell will allow the caster to understand the language of,
and com- municate with, creatures speaking a non-human tongue. (e.g. Goblins,
Orcs, etc.).

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### YAP

This spell allows the caster to understand the languages of, and com- municate
with, most animals. It will be ineffective unless the caster is wearing a
Green-Haired Wig.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### ZIP

An invaluable aid in close battle, this spell is only usable when the caster is
wearing a Ring of Green Metal, such metal having been mined from the Craggen
Rock. When the spell is cast on to this ring, it enables the wearer to
disappear, and reappear a short distance away. The transportation can be through
some soft materials such as wood and clay, but is blocked by stone, metal and
the like. It is a rather unreliable spell, though - occasionally it has
disastrous results.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### FAR

In conjunction with an Orb of Crystal, this spell will enable its caster to see,
with certain limitations, into the future. The Orb must be held in the hands and
the spell is recited while concentrating on the Orb. Very little control can be
exercised on exactly what will be seen, but the normal tendency is to see
near-future events.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### RES

When cast upon a dead human or humanoid creature (i.e. one with two arms, two
legs, a head, etc.) while Holy Water is being sprinkled on the corpse, this
spell brings it back to life. The resurrection takes some time to work - the
body does not simply spring back on its feet - and the ex-corpse can be killed
again as normal. For some time after this spell has taken effect, the
resurrected creature is dull and dozy, but it may answer questions asked of it
by the caster.

Cost 1 **STAMINA** point

### ZED

Casting this spell is beyond the means of most minor conjurers because of the
great powers of concentration necessary. In fact, in all known history, this
spell has been cast only once. Its caster, a powerful Necromancer from Throben,
was never seen again and thus its effects are unknown. The Necromancer's notes
were subsequently found, but only indications as to its effects could be
assumed. Suffice it to say that this is perhaps the most formidable spell in
known magic lore- but no living magician knows its true effect.

Cost 7 **STAMINA** points
